defragmenting your hard drive it's a lot
like changing the oil in your sedan
something everyone has to do regularly
but it's an exciting inconvenient and
therefore very easy to put off at least
with oil though most people understand
the purpose but Windows doesn't really
tell you much about what defragmentation
actually is other than some vague
statement about how it makes your drives
faster so what exactly is it the reason
that disk defragmentation is a thing is
because of the way a mechanical hard
drive stores data think of a hard drive
as a really really long sheet of paper
when you first install your operating
system and put things on it everything
is stored in basically a straight line
starting at the top and working your way
down but over time of course you'll
start changing or deleting files and
adding new ones so suppose one of the
files you delete is located closer to
the top of the sheet of paper say you
don't want to play minesweeper anymore
now you have some free space there
that's right in the middle of a bunch of
other data instead of being at the very
end like it was when you first started
using your hard drive so what happens to
this free space well suppose you put
another relatively large file on your
hard drive like maybe a filmed speech
about how much you love gave in or
whatever you're into but your computer
will do is it'll place part of that
large file in that minesweeper free
space until it's filled up and then
place the rest of the file elsewhere on
your hard drive this is called file
fragmentation and it can seriously slow
performance because in a mechanical
Drive the platters have to physically
spin to allow the drives head to access
the files and if a file is broken up
into several parts scattered all over
your disk it's naturally going to take
longer to bring up whatever it is you're
looking for defragmentation reverses
these effects by doing two things one it
reassembles any files that have been
broken into little pieces and places the
files in just one physical location on
your disk resulting in faster access to
it rearranges most of the free space on
your drive into one large continuous
chunk so that your PC won't try to
fragment new files or information and
divvy them up into little cubby holes of
free space like we did when we were in
kindergarten now you might be asking but
what
second what if I have an SSD I heard
you're not supposed to defragment those
you would be correct defragmentation
doesn't result in the same performance
benefits for SSDs and the reason for
this is that since SSDs don't have any
moving parts the PC can access all the
data at roughly the same speed
regardless of which chip of the SSD is
actually holding a particular chunk of a
file in fact trying to defragment an SSD
can do more harm than good the cells
that actually contain data on an SSD can
only be written to so many times until
they wear out and become completely
useless and defragmentation uses up a
lot of those write cycles playing
digital 15 puzzle if you're running
Windows 7 or newer though don't fret the
OS actually won't even let you
defragment any connected SSDs and will
instead give you an option to optimize
the SSD what this will do instead of
defragging is send something called a
trim command
unlike mechanical hard drives on which
the data can simply be overwritten the
cells on SSDs have to be erased before
new data can be written to them or else
you can seriously lose performance over
time trim erases cells with old data
that hasn't actually been physically
removed from the drive yet which I
explained in this video by the way ahead
of time so the SSD can write new
information to those cells much more
quickly in the future trim is usually
handled automatically by windows so you
don't need to do much to keep it running
other than running a trim checker to
ensure you actually is working but if
you have a mechanical hard drive make
sure defragmentation is running
periodically otherwise half-life 3 might
actually be confirmed by the time the
game you're playing whatever one it is
actually loads speaking of loading I'm
sure our sponsor is coming soon wait for
it yeah there it is
audible.com audible.com has over 150,000
audiobooks that you can download and
listen to on the train while you're
training with earbuds so you can block
out your train central HVAC unit cave at
Joe cuddle but they've got everything
from the latest popular audio books to
classics like weathering Heights by
Emily brontë sometimes the original
author even narrates the audiobook but
in the case of today's featured title
that would have been
little tricky but what's not tricky is
becoming a member so you have a new
audiobook to listen to every month the
first one is even free with no
obligation so head over to audible.com
slash tech wiki to try it out thanks
audible for supporting our channel
thanks to you the viewer for supporting
our channel and you know what thanks to
me for supporting our channel I always
thank you guys and say I couldn't happen
without all of you but dammit I'm an
integral part of this too
I mean imagine a threeway without the
third which is just you know what I'm
just going to quit while I'm ahead make
sure you're subscribed if you aren't
already